---
layout: post
title:  "VC Funded Austerity Alleviators"
date:   2018-05-16 18:06:56 -0700
author: raja
categories: jekyll update
---

  Perhaps the greatest evil is AltSchool's hubris. Not in the heart of any single person there, but in the single-minded focus on one thing: getting the next round of funding. In terms of value to the development of public education, AltSchool has little to offer for its ~$180 million raised.

​	Pitched to V.Cs and new hires alike as an opportunity to learn how to best use computation in service of learning in the classroom, the real truth is its sights were too small. Some say that meeting the market where it's at is the next best thing to do. The question, what is AltSchool offerring that isn't already out there?

​	This ultimately begs the question: to what ends are our investments in education going? The purpose of AltSchool's product, like many other ed-tech products out there, is to make more bearable the burden of documentation due to accountability. To what ends go accountability? To career-preparation, career-readiness. The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation's website says their primary goal in education is to "Significantly increase the number of black, Latino, and low-income students who earn a diploma, enroll in a postsecondary institution, and are on track in their first year to obtain a credential with labor-market value." This is not to say that having a job isn't a good thing, but can that really be the only desired outcome from an education? This is a proxy for, at best, improved income. Drawing from economist Amartya Sen's notion of capabilities to function, though, makes clear that people can have decent incomes but still be impoverished in some way.

​	Education is about something much bigger: human conversation across space, time, and creed. Building community and cultural awareness, and where one sits in that. Accountability minimizes these ends in favor of other goals. The increased focus on the aspects of education that are measurable, that involve careful sequence and involve repetition, both creates a market and sustains the existing system. A market of measurement, documentation, and analysis.

​	Picking between increased austerity and privatization driving wealth inequality leaves scant opportunity to allow students to begin by examining the real conditions of their environment. The nature of their existence. In this, no learner lacks interest in some form or another. And through it, students gain interest in various aspects, and immerse themselves within, thus gaining a full education. John Dewey spoke of this. Accountability is about ensuring unequal distribution of resources by imposing punitive or reductive measures on schools that can't possibly meet the standards. No schools have been more impacted by accountability (for the worse) than those with a lot of low-income or otherwise improverished students. When we first thought there was a problem, when _A Nation at Risk_ came out, why was our first instinct to 'account' for the funds, rather than simply dispersing them? Implicit racism is at play here: the fear that the funds would be wasted. We don't have this same fear when it comes to those with privilege.

​	The response I hear is that making political change is hard, that there is a lot of resistance, first to the idea of 'handing out' money to the underserved, second to the idea of removing accountability, third to instituting progressive pedagogy as a primary approach. We can't even agree on a shared history curriculum. Some even argue that this is why technology is our best approach for delivering progressive pedagogy, for overcoming the burden of accountability. Even if it were possible for technology to scaffold practice to the extent necessary, it would still be problematic to have this be the sole locus of change. Would it not be better for teaching training to reflect the demands, and for policy to make it more possible, thus making progressive pedagogy practices more sustainable for the long run? A technology company's product and services are ephemeral, limited, and controlled.

​	AltSchool envisioned itself as being one player in a large ecosystem of education providers, each playing a small part in the overall picture. This is code for privatization. Privatization of education will fail to produce the desired result because the desired result is not measureable in a timescale relevant to determining whether you should spend your money in one place or another. The ROI calculation will fail to account for much that matters. Meeting standards, like the Common Core, or having a good score on a standardized test, is not enough. That can be, and always will be, gamed, thanks to Campbell's Law.

​	Privatization also minimizes the democratic aspect of education: building good citizens. This comes down to building happy, thoughtful people. Which cannot be measured. And yet we hold ourselves accountable on the things that matter less. Why? A functioning system need not be predicated upon any measure, in the same way that what matters more in education is the process, not the product. The desired product (and much more) will emerge from the right process. But optimizing for the product ensures that only that product, and not much else, will come to pass.
