---
layout: post
title:  "The Problem with Business Thinking"
date:   2018-05-16 18:06:56 -0700
categories: jekyll update
---

​	AltSchool had good intentions, and saw itself as part of the progressive movement, but it had other priorities as well. These good intentions were weighed against satisfying investor demand, and of course investor demand won out. AltSchool failed to consider the very real conflicts between satisfying investor demand and the demands of progressive pedagogy: the two cannot be met at the same time. The justification is a neoliberal one: the greatest social good is a by-product of meeting market demands. This is a distortion of Adam Smith's notion of capitalism, ignoring his warnings against profit motive and self-interest as the sole mechanism of social organization. Historical evidence shows that simply meeting market demand does not generate the greatest social good. Markets tend towards a single, quantified, measure of value: money. The broader ecosystem of ed-tech companies is focused on furthering a vision of education where parents as consumers can have a clear return on investment: money put in for future earning potential of their child. This approach fails to account for externalities, long-term effects, and non-monetary factors, all of which are quite pronounced in education.

​	This kind of market-based thinking has become more popular in many other domains, particularly since the Regan era. Healthcare is quite similar in this regard. Cost-based management of healthcare is also seeking direct ROI as well: hospitals are treated as profit centers whose costs must be managed by a board, CEO, and administration. In an attempt to minimize the cost to provide services while maximizing outcomes, every interaction with each patient is carefully documented. Guidelines are established for how much time should be spent, with interactions reduced to standardized questions. Doctors, strapped for time and forced to show an immediate result in the patients' well-being, give quick-fix solutions favoring pharmaceuticals and other technical solutions. They are unable to consider the context in which a patient experiences their problem, the behavioral, social, and cultural mechanisms. That is someone else's problem. The benefit of a doctor spending the time to understand each patient, to build a relationship with them, is not quantifiable. So it is devalued in the healthcare system. Doctors can only consider what they have been assigned: reducing the physical manifestations, the symptoms. Even with the expanded power offered through the potential of genetic therapy, the doctor's palette is inherently reduced. A holistic picture of a patient's health is considered only by healthcare providers actively working outside the system of incentives they are supposed to respond to.

​	One may ask, "But what if we adjust the incentives? What if we are able to establish a value for preventative care, "

​	"Scientific management" relies on optimizing for some limited set of measures to control or manage a system. Quite frequently, if not always, this measure amounts to money. Money, as Zach Stein puts it, is considered to be the sole measure of value in a neoliberal system. In healthcare this means billing for the services rendered (Fee for Service), rather than on the outcome. There are active efforts to change Medicare/Medicaid billing to be Pay for Performance instead. These efforts will fail unless they consider beyond the individual visit.

​	It is these same principles that are now being applied to education. A notion of "ROI" for each individual child, in terms of resources put in vs. the income level they will attain later, is being developed. This is driven in part by the school choice movement, but perhaps more forcefully by the school reform and accountability movements, and more recently by venture philanthropists like the Bill and Melinda Gates foundation. These groups believe that establishing a clear ROI for each individual will enable consumers to make the best choices, and at the same time, business can profit. Thus, being able to translate educational experience into future productive means becomes the goal of education. This recasts parents as consumers, and students as the product. This method favors the measureable parameters on both the input (the environment and experiences of a student) and output (what results 'after' the educational experience). The curriculum goals all become focused on what is easily sequenced (finishing A means you are ready for B and C), and the output is understood by the value of the sequence A, B, C against future employment and career.

​	However, the measureability of the input experiences and the output life of the individual and society are seriously in question. Only early literacy and pre-high school math are well-sequenced, though the belief that other subjects will eventually be sequenced is strong among AltSchool's employees. Believing otherwise would amount to a rejection of the company's existence. More complex (and desirable) results from the educational experience, such as moral fortitutude, responsibility to the community, a deep understanding of oneself in relation to the environment (social, economic, historic, cultural, natural), are minimized in favor of the more sequenceable.

​	The only benefactors of this system are those controlling the means of production. Through ignoring externalities (or, for that matter, anything besides ROI), the value received by capitalists is far greater than those beneath them. However, this system is often justified on the basis that it produces the greatest good: the capitalists "create jobs," thus trickling down the value to the workers. This has been shown historically to fail on several counts: value gets concentrated by few, and it is at the expense of better outcomes for all. Thus, both the aggregate total of social good and the average (good per person) are less than they would be under management that considers externalities and the aggregate.

​	It is for this reason that education and healthcare should be managed publicly, as public goods. A body considering long term outcomes, non-monetary outcomes, and externalities. Such a system would instead focus on teacher training, building strong community support systems and ways to involve everyone in the way of life that is education, akin to Dewey's notion. It would recognize that meaningful experiences with the self and others are the true value of education, not career-readiness. That learning is a continual process happening in formal and informal contexts, with or without others. The essential role of context must be respected, and a system of federal and state provided funds dispersed based on population size and need, with few strings attached (an increased accreditation process and uniformly higher pay). The school could be the place of gathering, of forming community. And in many places, it is, in spite of continual pressure against this.

​	Of course, there must be some degree of accountability, for the same reason it was ostensibly introduced: to prevent corruption and incentivize states to more evenly distribute resources. But it must be recognized that it is better to give money to the poor directly rather than through indirect means. The poor know very well what they need, and will continually work in their favor to improve their freedoms, particularly when there is a freedom to do so. Such an accountability system (respecting this) would standardize inputs (though not necessarily equalize them) over outputs. Inputs are teacher training, experiences of a broad variety, facilities, and time. These are not the ends, but the means to a more democratic society. In this sense, the Common Core could be seen as a step in the right direction (at least, relative to prior art), though in line with the discussion above, its focus on sequence is problematic.

​	One common justification of neoliberal policy is that the government is corrupt, and has failed us repeatedly. The only path forward is the market, not policy. This conflates cause (neoliberal policy) for effect (corruption of government). Aggregative concerns demand a body that can make considerations outside that of the individual. Would you insist that epidemics be stopped by the market? It is clear that eradicating disease for all is uniformly superior to providing each with the choice (should they have the means) to avoid disease. It is no different in education.

​	A national vision for education must be revitalized, one that all can stand by. Popular support is the sole requirement, but few have stood forward and offered a unifying vision. The future of our democracy is necessarily invovled. We must hold venture philanthropists and billionaires accountable as well. We have alllowed them to avoid severe taxation in favor of transferring their wealth to foundations which claim to be building for tomorrow but in truth are perpetuating their influence, wealth, and legacy. This is similar to how Carnegie, Rockefeller, and other industrialists shaped American culture to their own image in the early 20th century, to their disproportionate benefit.